# Technical Specifications
This document is very much a work in progress. The overall intention is that any behavior of Chelsea will be documented for human-readability as well as testability. The documentation contains requirements, as outlined in `about-reqs.md`.

## VMs

### States
- Booting
- Paused
- Running
- Sleeping

### Provisioning
When a new VM request comes in, Chelsea will verify that the host possesses enough resources to run the requested VM. Every VM is associated with a certain amount of "reserved" resources, namely the vCPU count and memory count, in mebibytes. Any particular VM is not guaranteed to utilize 100% of its reserved resources - CPU usage is prone to increasing and decreasing sporadically as one would expect of a computer. memory count, however, will slowly increase over time, at least with the Firecracker backend. Firecracker uses [copy-on-write access to the memory file](https://github.com/firecracker-microvm/firecracker/blob/main/docs/snapshotting/snapshot-support.md#about-microvm-snapshotting), hence this behavior (rather than writing directly to the file, or loading the entire thing greedily on boot).  

^Any new VM request which would exceed the hard, per-VM maxima - `chelsea_vm_max_vcpu_count`, `chelsea_vm_max_memory_mib`, and `chelsea_vm_max_volume_mib` - will be rejected, regardless of whether the host could theoretically run it or not.  

By default, chelsea's provisioning algorithm ensures that overprovisioning is unlikely to occur. (Strict guarantees cannot be made, since Chelsea is not clairvoyant and cannot possibly know how much memory the host will need in total.) ^On startup, unless overprovisioning is enabled (see [Overprovisioning](#overprovisioning)), if either of `chelsea_vm_total_vcpu_count` or `chelsea_vm_total_memory_mib` exceeds the host's vCPU count or memory count respectively, then an error will be returned. ^Similarly, on startup, unless overprovisioning is enabled, a warning will be printed if either `chelsea_vm_total_vcpu_count` or `chelsea_vm_total_memory_mib` would leave the host with less than 4 vCPUs or 8192 MiB of memory for non-VM processes. Please note that while vCPU overprovisioning is always non-fatal, memory overprovisioning can and will lead to hard locks, so it is imperative that system administrators ensure that adequate swap space is present on the host in the (somewhat unlikely?) case that every running VM has maxed out its memory allocation and the host's own consumption increases beyond the margin allowed to it. ^On receiving a new VM request, Chelsea will first ensure that the new VM would not cause the total amount of "reserved" resources to exceed `chelsea_vm_total_vcpu_count` or `chelsea_vm_total_memory_mib`. This is true whether overprovisioning is enabled or not.

#### Overprovisioning
Setting configuration variables `chelsea_allow_vcpu_overprovisioning=true` or `chelsea_allow_memory_overprovisioning=true` allows the instance to overprovision VM resources. ^When `chelsea_allow_vcpu_overprovisioning=true` is set, chelsea will not validate the value of `chelsea_vm_total_vcpu_count` against the host vCPU count on start, and similarly when `chelsea_allow_memory_overprovisioning=true` is set, chelsea will not validate the value of `chelsea_vm_total_memory_mib` against the host memory count on start. ^When `chelsea_allow_vcpu_overprovisioning=true` and `chelsea_vm_total_vcpu_count=0` are both set, then the value of `chelsea_vm_total_vcpu_count` will be instead treated as infinity (or a very large number) for the purposes of the on-VM-creation reserved resource check and telemetry; the same is true of `chelsea_allow_memory_overprovisioning=true` and `chelsea_vm_total_memory_mib=0`.

### Monitoring
Chelsea's monitoring subsystem, Mulberry, is responsible for monitoring the state of the host machine. ^On startup, and periodically thereafter, Mulberry will check for issues that may exist on the host. When Mulberry encounters an issue, it will attempt some sequence of cleanup events. These are generally considered "best-effort" cleanups, and any cleanup steps which are unable to be performed do not halt execution and are logged with a warning, unless otherwise specified. The following issues must be caught by Mulberry:
- Ghost VMs. Ghost VMs are VMs which exist in the local sqlite database, but for whom the corresponding VM process cannot be found running on the host. ^When a ghost VM is detected by Mulberry, it will not be marked for restart until it has been detected as a ghost VM in `mulberry_ghost_vm_fail_count_restart_threshold` *consecutive* task iterations. ^When a ghost VM is marked for restart by Mulberry, an attempt to reboot the VM will be made first. ^In the event a ghost VM's reboot fails, then the VM will be fully deleted, with stop code `GhostRebootFailed`.

#### Resource usage
Mulberry will constantly monitor the actual resource usage on the host machine. This is in contrast to the "reserved" resource usage which is checked whenever a VM is provisioned. `mulberry_cpu_usage_warning_threshold` is a floating-point value and should likely be between 0.0 and 100.0, inclusive. `mulberry_memory_mib_usage_warning_threshold` is a floating-point value and should likely be 0.0 or greater. The reason for this is because, for the purpose of monitoring, the memory usage of the host considers the amount of swap utilized - this ensures that two hosts, both with 10% RAM utilized, but one having 0% swap utilized and the other having 80% swap utilized, do not appear to be under an equal amount of stress. So a host with 100 GiB of RAM, with 90 GiB of RAM used and 180 GiB of swap used, regardless of the amount of swap available, will internally be considered to use 270.00% RAM. ^When Mulberry detects that CPU usage has exceeded `mulberry_cpu_usage_warning_threshold`, or that memory usage (*including* swap usage) has exceeded `mulberry_memory_mib_usage_warning_threshold`, a notification will be logged at warning level. At present, no action is taken to prevent running out of memory. It is expected that orchestrator will monitor chelsea instances and move VMs around as needed; Mulberry may or may not be involved in this, but logging these warnings seems to be a good idea.

### Operations

#### Kill
^When a VM in the Sleeping state is Killed, its sleep snapshot must be deleted.

#### Sleep
To put a VM to Sleep means putting it into a state which consumes no resources, but can be woken later with the same ID and VM state (See Wake below). ^It is only valid to put a VM to Sleep if it is in the 'Paused' or 'Running' state. ^The external API may allow a 'Booting' VM to be put to Sleep, if and only if the `skip_wait_boot` param (default false) is false, in which case it will wait for the VM to enter the 'Booting' state before proceeding with the operation as normal. ^After successfully putting a VM to Sleep, it will be in the 'Sleeping' state. ^If a VM is unsuccessfully put to Sleep, its state will remain unchanged. ^When a VM is put to Sleep, a one-time use Firecracker snapshot is created and uploaded to S3. ^The Ceph image of a VM that is put to Sleep will not be snapshotted or cloned. ^When putting a VM to Sleep, all metadata required to later Wake it will be stored in Postgres, on the `chelsea` schema. ^After a snapshot is successfully created for a VM being put to Sleep, the associated process will be killed. ^The snapshot associated with a Sleeping VM must never be considered for deletion.

#### Wake
To Wake a VM means to start a VM that was previously in the 'Sleeping' state. ^It is only valid to Wake a VM that is in the 'Sleeping' state. ^After successfully Waking a VM, it will be in the 'Running' state. ^If a Wake fails, the VM will remain in the 'Sleeping' state. ^A VM that is Woken must preserve its original ID. ^Upon Waking a VM, the snapshot created when it was put to Sleep will be internally marked as used, and associated resources may be considered for freeing. That is, unlike snapshots created by Commit, snapshots created by Sleep need not be stored until a deletion is requested. They need only be stored until the VM is Killed or Woken. ^A VM that is Woken will retain the same VM state (memory, process, etc) that it was put to Sleep with. ^A new Ceph image will not be created for a Woken VM; the VM will instead reuse the original image that it was put to Sleep with. ^A VM may be Woken on a different host than it was put to Sleep on.